Add metrics builder (#438)
axiomhq/docs: query-data/metrics/query-metrics.mdx

### Transformations

Use the **Transformations** section to transform individual values or series.

1. Click **+** in the **Transformations** section.
1. Select the transformation you want to apply to the data. Available transformations are:
    - **map:** Map the data to a new value using the expression you specify.
    - **align:** Aggregate data using the function and the time window you specify.
    - **group:** Group the data by a set of tags using the aggregation function you specify.

#### Map

Use `map` to transform individual values.

Available mapping functions:

| Function              | Description                                                      |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `rate`                | Computes the per-second rate of change for a metric.             |
| `abs`                 | Returns the absolute value of each data point.                   |
| `interpolate::linear` |  Linear interpolation of missing values. |
| `fill::prev`          | Fills missing values using the previous non-null value.          |

> | `!`                   | Negates the value. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `!`                   | Negates the value. The value 0 is mapped to 1, and all other values are mapped to 0. |
```

> | `!`                   | Negates the value. Maps 0 to 1, and all other values to 0. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

As it was not used anywhere we decided to remove this from the preview to provide a better alternative later

|----------|---------------------------------------|
| `avg`    | Averages values in each interval.     |
| `count`  | Counts non-null values per interval.  |
| `max`    | Takes the maximum value per interval. |
| `min`    | Takes the minimum value per interval. |
| `prom::rate` | Prometheus style rate |
| `sum`    | Sums values in each interval.         |

For example, to calculate the average over 5-minute time windows, use `align to 5m using avg`. To count the data points in the last hour, use `align to 1h using count`.

#### Group

Use `group` to combine series by tags. You can specify the tags to group by and the aggregation function to apply. If you don’t specify tags, Axiom aggregates all series into one group.

Available aggregation functions:

| Function | Description                           |
|----------|---------------------------------------|
| `avg`    | Averages values in each group.     |
| `count`  | Counts non-null values per group.  |
| `max`    | Takes the maximum value per group. |
| `min`    | Takes the minimum value per group. |
| `sum`    | Sums values in each group.         |

For example:
- To calculate the number of series, use `group using count`.

> - To calculate the total number of nodes, use `group using sum`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sum the values of all series, use `group using sum`.
```

Author: @benenharrington Could you please explain why you would remove this example?

Reviewer: Resolved in slack

---
title: Query metrics
description: This page explains how to query OpenTelemetry metrics.
---

Query and analyze your OpenTelemetry metrics data using the Axiom Console. This page shows you how to extract insights from your metrics through filtering, aggregation, and transformation operations.

For more information on working with metrics at Axiom, see [Metrics overview](/query-data/metrics/overview).

<Info>
Support for OTel metrics is currently in private preview. For more information, see [Feature states](/platform-overview/roadmap#feature-states).
</Info>

## Concepts

- **Dataset:** A group of related metrics.

> - **Metric:** One-dimensional time series data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Metric:** A collection of all series that measure the same metric.
```

my suggestion has horrible wording but I'm not sure how to better phrase it, but it's definitely not one dimensional metric has both the 'tags' dimension and the 'time' dimension; but I think mentioning dimensionality is going to be very confusing to users

Author: Thanks! Could you please let me know what you think? https://github.com/axiomhq/docs/pull/438/commits/bc1ab1c2ce824b615ed91e673288a3f7e35ae9aa

Reviewer 2: that's really great! I love it :D

- **Tag:** A key-value pair identifying a series.
- **Series:** A unique combination of a metric and tag set.

## Query structure

A typical metrics query contains the following:

1. **Source**: Defines dataset and the metric to query.

> 1. **Filter**: Applies conditions to a series by its tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Filter**: Refine the set of series queried by matching against tag values.
```

1. **Transformation** can be the following:
    - **Mapping:** Maps the data to a new value.

>     - **Aggregation:** Aggregates the data over a given time to a single value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Aggregation:** Aggregates the data over a given time.
```

I would leave out 'to a single value' as it can be confusing as one can still have multiple series's and multiple values in time

>     - **Grouping:** Groups the data by a set of tags, combining overlapping values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Grouping:** Groups the data by a set of tags, combining values over different series that are measured at the same timestamp.
```

>     - **Grouping:** Groups the data by a set of tags, combining values over different series that are measured at the same timestamp.

Reviewer: Would it make more sense to use the 'align' language here?

```suggestion
1. **Transformation**: Aligns the raw data with the chosen time step, and performs selected mappings and groupings:
    - **Mapping:** Maps the data to a new value.
    - **Align:** Aggregates the data to the chosen time step using the chosen aggregation.
    - **Grouping:** Groups the data by a set of tags using the chosen aggregation.
```

Author: @benenharrington Could you please check this? https://github.com/axiomhq/docs/pull/438/commits/e7c5858d1f354ccd3be799bf93312bf8ab299852

## Build metrics query

1. Click the Query tab.
1. Click **Builder** in the top left.

> 1. In **Dataset**, select a dataset with OTel metrics data, and then select the metric you want to query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In **Dataset**, select a OTel metrics dataset, and then select the metric you want to query.
```

very minor change but technically someonme could ingest json otel metrics into a events dataset and create a 'dataset with otel metrics data' that won't work here

> 1. In **Dataset**, select a OTel metrics dataset, and then select the metric you want to query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In **Dataset**, select an OTel metrics dataset, and then select the metric you want to query.
```
I'm guessing there's a convention you're applying here, just commenting to learn!

1. To filter data:
    1. Click **+** in the **Where** section.

>     1. Select the field where you want to filter for values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. Select the tag where you want to filter for values.
```

    1. Select the logical operator of the filter.
    1. Specify the value for which you want to filter.
1. In **Transformations**, select the transformations you want to apply to the data.
1. Click **Run**.

## Example query

<Frame>
<img src="/doc-assets/shots/example-metrics-query.png" alt="Example metrics query" />
</Frame>

> This example queries the `axiom-dev.metrics` dataset’s `alertmanager_alerts` metric one hour before the current time. It filters results to events where `k8s.namespace.name` is `monitoring` and aggregates events over 30- second time windows into their average value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example queries the `axiom-dev.metrics` dataset’s `alertmanager_alerts` metric one hour before the current time. It filters results to events where `k8s.namespace.name` is `monitoring` and aggregates events over 30-second time windows into their average value.
```

## Elements of queries

> The following explains each element of an AxQL query.

Reviewer: I think we need to rework this section to remove references to AxQL for now. I'll add suggestions below that just delete the various code snippets as it still seems worthwhile to document the available operators, but open to alternatives.
```suggestion
The following explains each element of a metrics query.
```

### Source

Specify the dataset and the metric.

**Syntax:**

```kusto
<dataset>:<metric>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- **dataset**: Name of the dataset.
- **metric**: Name of the metric.

### Filter

Use `where` to filter series based on tag values.

**Syntax:**

```kusto
| where <tag> <operator> <value>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Available operators:

- Equality: `==`, `!=`
- Comparisons: `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`

**Example:**

```kusto
| where project == /.*metrics.*/ and code >= 200 and code < 300
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| `rate`                | Computes the per-second rate of change for a metric.             |
| `min(arg)`            | Returns the minimum between the argument and the value.               |
| `max(arg)`            | Returns the maximum between the argument and the value.               |
| `abs`                 | Returns the absolute value of each data point.                   |
| `fill::prev`           | Fills missing values using the previous non-null value.          |
| `fill::const(arg)`     | Fills missing values with a constant.                            |
| `interpolate::linear` |  Linear interpolation of missing values. |
| `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`    | Performs the respective mathematical calculation on each value.  |
|  `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=` | Sets the value to `1.0` if the condition is true, `0` otherwise. |

**Examples for data mappings:**

```kusto
// Calculate rate per second for the metric
| map rate

// Add 5 to each value
| map  + 5

// Fill empty values with the latest value
| map fill::prev

// Fill empty values with zeros
| map fill::const(0)

// Set existing values to 0 if the value is < 0.4. Else set to 1.
| map < 0.4
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Aggregation

Use `align` to aggregate over time windows.

**Syntax:**

```kusto
| align to <time_window> using <aggregation_function>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Available aggregation functions:

| Function | Description                           |
|----------|---------------------------------------|
| `avg`    | Averages values in each interval.     |
| `sum`    | Sums values in each interval.         |
| `min`    | Takes the minimum value per interval. |
| `max`    | Takes the maximum value per interval. |
| `count`  | Counts non-null values per interval.  |
| `prom::rate` | Prometheus style rate |

**Examples:**

```kusto
// Calculate the average over 5-minute time windows
| align to 5m using avg

// Count the data points in the last hour
| align to 1h using count
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Grouping

Use `group by` to combine series by tags.

**Syntax:**

```kusto
| group [by <tag1>, <tag2>] using <aggregation_function>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you don’t specify tags, Axiom aggregates all series into one group.

Available aggregation functions:

| Function | Description                           |
|----------|---------------------------------------|
| `avg`    | Averages values in each interval.     |
| `sum`    | Sums values in each interval.         |
| `min`    | Takes the minimum value per interval. |
| `max`    | Takes the maximum value per interval. |

> | `count`  | Counts non-null values per interval.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `avg`    | Averages values in each group.     |
| `sum`    | Sums values in each group.         |
| `min`    | Takes the minimum value per group. |
| `max`    | Takes the maximum value per group. |
| `count`  | Counts non-null values per group.  |
```

**Examples:**

```kusto
// Calculate the number of series
| group using count

// Calculate the total number of nodes
| group using sum

// Group data by the `project` and `namespace` tags using the `sum` aggregation
| group by project, namespace using sum

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
